h1. Generic Roles

*Generic Roles* (or simply Roles) is a generic Roles API implementation that specific ORM Roles implementations can implement.
This way you can easily change ORM and still keep using the same underlying API.

A Rails 3 generator is included that can configure an existing User model with a generic Role strategy of choice.
Each ORM Roles implementation should have its own generator suited for that particular ORM.

Since Jan. 2011, Roles now includes a Group API that allows ordering roles into groups (see below).  

h2. Roles ORM implementations

The following ORM specific Roles implementations are currently available

h3. Relational Database (SQL)

* "Active Record":http://github.com/kristianmandrup/roles_active_record
* "Data Mapper":http://github.com/kristianmandrup/roles_data_mapper

h3. Mongo DB

* "Mongoid":(http://github.com/kristianmandrup/roles_mongoid
* "Mongo Mapper":http://github.com/kristianmandrup/roles_mongo_mapper

h3. Couch DB

* "Simply Stored":http://github.com/kristianmandrup/roles_simply_stored

_Note:_ 

The 'simply_stored' implementation is only partly complete (admin_flag strategy works).
Feel free to roll your own implementation for your favorite ORM/Data store.

h2. Install

<code>gem install roles_generic</code>

h2. Role strategy configuration

The following demonstrates some examples of role strategy configuration.

h3. Strategy: admin_flag

Example: Default model configuration:

<pre>class User
  include Roles::Generic 
    
  strategy :admin_flag
  valid_roles_are :admin, :guest
  ...
end
</pre>

h3. Strategy: one_role

Example: Customizing model names:

<pre>class Bruger
  include Roles::Generic 

  strategy :one_role, :role_class => :rolle
  valid_roles_are :admin, :guest
  ...
end
</pre>

Here the Role class is configured to be named 'Rolle' (Danish translation). 
If no :role_class options is passed, the default role class 'Role' is used (if the Role class is defined).

Note: The customizing of the Role class model is not yet complete. The generator and such still needs to be updated... Feel free to assist!

h2. Roles generator

A Rails 3 generator is included to update an existing User model with a roles strategy and a set of valid roles.
The Generic Roles generator doesn't work for a persistent model. In that case use a dedicated implementation for the ORM (data store) used (see above).

h3. Usage example

<code>rails g roles_generic:roles --strategy admin_flag --roles guest admin</code>  

h2. Role strategies

The following role strategies are built-in:

Inline roles (attribute in User model):

* _admin_flag_ (Boolean flag - 'admin' or not)
* _role_string_ (String)
* _roles_string_ (comma separated String)
* _role_strings_ (list of Strings)
* _roles_mask_ (Integer mask)

Separate Role model:

* _one_role_ (single relation to a Role model instance)
* _many_roles_ (multiple Role relationships)

Embedded Role model (Document stores only):

* _embed_one_role_
* _embed_many_roles_  

Currently the embedded strategies have only been implemented for Mongoid.

See "Roles strategy configuration":https://github.com/kristianmandrup/roles_generic/wiki/Roles-strategy-configuration for more info

h2. Roles APIs

The full Roles API is described in these Wiki pages:

* "Roles-Read-API":https://github.com/kristianmandrup/roles_generic/wiki/Roles-Read-API
* "Roles-Write-API":https://github.com/kristianmandrup/roles_generic/wiki/Roles-Write-API
* "Roles-Group-API":https://github.com/kristianmandrup/roles_generic/wiki/Roles-Group-API

h3. Using Roles Groups

The Group API allows roles to be grouped.

Example:

Say you have the _admin_ roles:

* Admin
* Super admin

And the _customer_ roles

* Individual customer
* Company customer

You might want to group them like this: 

<pre>
  User.add_role_group :customers => [:individual_customer, :company_customer]
  User.add_role_group :admins => [:admin, :super_admin]  
</pre>

Then you can handle any user with regards to his/her role group relationship like this:

<pre>
  # do this only for users in the admin role group (user has either :admin or :super_admin role) 
  current_user.is_in_group? :admin do
    ...
  end
</pre>

Expect this functionality to soon to be wrapped by Cream helper methods as well ;)

h2. Note on Patches/Pull Requests
 
* Fork the project.
* Make your feature addition or bug fix.
* Add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a
  future version unintentionally.
* Commit, do not mess with rakefile, version, or history.
  (if you want to have your own version, that is fine but bump version in a commit by itself I can ignore when I pull)
* Send me a pull request. Bonus points for topic branches.

h2. Copyright

Copyright (c) 2010 Kristian Mandrup. See LICENSE for details.
